Remind me, when did the monks first come to the Abbey?
They came in 1176. We seem to have two founding dates, 1143 and 1176,
and it worked like a sort of church planting system,
thinking about church planting today, a successful church goes off and starts
one somewhere else, and it wasn't very different in
medieval times with the foundation of the monasteries.
There was a time of religious fervour created by the crusades that were going
on in the background for quite a while, so 100 years really,
and monks came from Whitland, which is in Carmarthenshire,
to find another abbey.
We think they could not have done that in 1143 because
they themselves were only founded in 1143, and latest research with Janet Burton
at Clampeter suggests that they were
struggling to do that and had to send reinforcements from head
office as it were, so the chances of them finding an abbey
here are pretty remote. So 1176
at the instigation of Cadwachlann, and it developed from there.
There's some suggestion that an earlier abbey was built
further down the valley just below Devanna,
and that seems to be based on just finding a
work piece of sculpture there some years ago now, done by the river.
It seems an unlikely sight. They wouldn't have built in stone anyway
at that point because they tended to build a temporary
church, and that would have been something very
timbre built. It took a long time to get abbeys going, about 30 years before
they were anywhere near up to scratch with it, so they would build the church,
and often they built a small wooden church, and then the bigger church
they just built basics to start with. Who would have built that? Would the monks have built that?
There was not enough of them. When an abbey was fully up and running,
you had about 60 monks of one sort or another, either
full monks or apprentice monks, minor people, and just people who were
sort of living the life without all the responsibilities of
religious side of it, but worked out on the farms and the fields and the
granges, so it was a slow business to develop them.
But there's no evidence that Camille ever had a large complement of
monks. Whenever there was a snapshot of what was going on there,
which is fairly few, you only got single figure numbers,
so it was never a big monastery in the sense of say fountains or
Reaver, the big northern ones, or Dastonbury for example.